uh those are a little theoretical those
are um a little um yeah at most an
overview and not nothing hands-on so uh
you know relax um grab another coffee
and um just um
just enjoy the show
um one thing that i wanted to get out
there is a concept that we recommend
using to structure data sets if they are
used for data analysis so a data data
set can have any structure you can
create any kind of sub data set
subdirectories and so forth um you can
put files in any place that you like but
we have a recommendation that has proven
useful
in all cases where there's a data
analysis that is done in data sets and
we call those principles the yoda
principles there's three three three
sets of rules that are quite easy to
adhere to and you can find or read out
more about them in several of the online
material that we
provide
the first concept that the yoda
principles propose is
the concept of modularity we summarize
it as one thing one data set
what this
rule
suggests
is that whenever any particular
collection of files could in any way be
useful in more than one context
for example
data in its raw format versus data in a
bit structured or pre-processed format
then these files should not be kept in
the same data set but they should be
standalone data sets each each their own
data set
but
in order to then still be able to you
know associate with them
uh to associate them with each other
you can install these data sets as what
is called a sub dataset i've mentioned
that concept it's a dataset inside of a
dataset that
essentially makes sure that one dataset
contains a version link to a different
dataset that keeps its history
the uh next part of this modularity is
that everything you know should be kind
of structured also in the human um
readable
way have a code repository i have a code
directory have a directory for data have
a directory for output don't you know
put everything together because that is
quite difficult to understand for fellow
humans if they um
get to inherit your data set because you
were the graduate student before and you
know they need to continue your analysis
and
then
it is also important for a data analysis
that you want to share
to keep a data set self-contained
that means whatever is needed for a data
analysis
needs to be present in the data set or
its sub data sets underneath so that you
can share this data set as one complete
component and whoever clones it
has for example
all of the linked input data that is
necessary
and that the paths
that are
used in your scripts to refer to this
input data
don't include your home directory or a
file that lives only on your desktop but
they are all only relative paths that go
um that go down the hierarchy of data
sets so that it's a portable structure
that you can also you know use in your
on your next computer on your compute
cluster and so forth
um the reason for this
um is is
there are multiple reasons um one reason
for this modularity is reuse and access
management
uh and here's a figure that
tries to to um
you know illustrate that
um you in in
analysis is something that
contains multiple different parts and
these parts can either be reused several
times so you may
have
results from a pre-processing pipeline
that can be used in several different
analysis
all these parts
are useful for different people or
not to be used for certain people so you
may have just acquired a new study
and you can't or you don't want to share
your raw data you want to keep that
secret
but maybe you want to
share pre-processed data with your lab
mates
then
in by having both of these different
different different
data packages as independent data sets
you give people the opportunity to only
clone that
package that data set that you actually
want them to use
the next reason um is for for from this
modularity scalability so i've told you
that you can bring git repositories to
their knees by adding too much large
content into git
but there's one other thing that can
bring get repositories to their knees
and that is adding too many files even
if it's small files and there is the git
can cope with
like a million files but we usually make
it a rule of thumb to modularize
every
few hundred thousand files or so just to
ensure that the tools can still handle
the amount of files so in the
human connectom project data set
where we have way more than 15 million
files we actually have
4 000 sub data sets that we distribute
this
large amount of files over to be able to
create such a large version controlled
collection of files so if you if you
have scalability in mind um if you have
really large data sets to process then
keep in mind that you should not have
more than a couple hundred thousand
files per
data set
and the last reason
is
transparency and here's a little
little overview on why that may be so
consider you are working with an
astrophysicist together you collaborate
on something and this is the input data
that they use it's just in format that
you that you don't know like the
astrophysicist a001
that's a standard in their field and
every astrophysicist knows that this is
a raw recording of sunspots or something
but you're a neuroscientist or a
psychologist and you have no idea
now if that astrophysicist then
performs an analysis
and saves the astrophysic specific
uh
well-known output format
ps34t which everyone knows is the
pre-processed sunspot
if
the astrophysicist saves that right next
to the input data then you as a
psychologist is a neuroscientist or
someone without the expert knowledge
that your collaborator has you will have
a hard time um figuring out which one is
the input file which one is the
processed file which one is the output
file and us neuroscientists
psychologists have all the same very
weird
domain
standards to to call our files how would
someone know
who has never used eeg data that you
know the field data is actually the
thing that is processed instead of the
thing
that
stands at the start of of an acquisition
so if instead of saving the
results of a computation right next to
the inputs but
one level higher
in a dedicated data set that clearly
identifies
those files to be something else than
the inputs then you can make it easier
for people that do not have domain
knowledge to just by looking at your
data set figure out what
is actually the relationship between the
files
that they see
and a couple of rule of thumbs when
modularization so creating independent
data sets might be might be useful
one reason may be that there is a
different target audience for data sets
that could be one data set or one set of
data is intended for public use and the
other one not
one is
for a for a for a
a panel of experts your colleagues the
other one is for the journalists that um
do not have domain knowledge
it can be if the pace of evolution is
different so something that is um
let's say raw data factual it will never
change that's useful to put in their own
data set versus something where there
are still uh loads of things to you know
um decide upon choices of pre-processing
you may keep that
in
individual repositories
then i already mentioned it the
scalability
considerations so if you have a file
system if you have git repository if you
have
huge amounts of files then
creating individual data sets
saves you from
breaking or from from slow operations
and of course also legal or access
constraints so if you have a data set
used as input but it contains private
data
and you have recorded the outputs of the
analysis you run on that input data in a
top level data set then it's much easier
for you to only push the data sets with
the outputs and not the input data sets
with the personal files simply because
it's a standalone data set so you don't
need to you know
do anything with the preferred content
configurations
um
the
second
principle is uh called record where you
got it from and where it is now and that
um
hints at the
provenance of digital
availability so
whenever you can it is advised that you
that you link data sets that you have
used in order to provide a versioned
event in your in your repositories
history that identifies
which data which
software which which dependency um has
been has been has been used
and then it's also important to record
whenever you add any kind of data
for example from web sources to record
this origin so that it also becomes
apparent and actionable for anyone who
works with your data set
and uh finally and that is also you know
the reason for this availability check
before you remove a data set make sure
that the stuff that you do in your data
set is actually you know backed up
somewhere or shared with others that you
collaborate on so
maintain this network of availability
and here's
how that how that works i've i've
mentioned that sub data sets are such a
cool thing i haven't told you yet how
how they are actually
created if you are inside of a data set
and you clone another data set in that
data set
um then you can add this little flag
data set and then
reference this is the unix pointer to
the current directory here this dot
to point to a data set that you want to
register this in
so if i'm inside of an analysis data set
and i clone http
example.comds
into
a directory inputs raw data
then this
data set will be a sub data set of my
analysis dataset and what is recorded in
the datasets history
is
the origin of that dataset the path it
saved under and also the version state
that it is currently in so if this is
really important input data then the
record of your super data sets so the
top level data set
that one contains a version link to
precisely
the state of the data that that you have
used and if your input data is updated
then you can run for example a recursive
update throughout the data set hierarchy
that starts in your
top level super data set and then it
will go down the hierarchy of data sets
it will check all of those registered
locations of that data set if there are
any updates and if so update them so
that you can refund your analysis on
updated data
and what is especially nice with these
linked data sets in the form of sub data
sets
is that if you don't retrieve any of the
data or if you've dropped everything
after you have performed the analysis
that you wanted to do then those version
links are extremely lightweight they
take up just a couple of bytes on your
system and yet they provide you or the
people that you share your data set with
with actionable access to precisely the
data that is needed
uh here's something
how that would look on a file system so
you have your analysis you have you know
all of the fancy stuff that you may do
and then the inputs they point to a
preprocessed data set that comes from a
different place and the
pre-processed data that actually points
to the raw data
before and in case you're sharing your
analysis with someone else then they can
retrieve if they're authorized to do so
all of these files um if they needed to
rerun everything but they can also you
know reuse the fmri prep data set
or
the bits data set
the last principle is to record what you
did and that
is something
that hints at the use of those
provenance capturing commands that you
have seen in the form of data that run
what i want to
get out
as the last thing
is uh
one crucial part of provenance is this
one here uh in which software
environment was
uh any kind of art produced by which
script so we yesterday did a data at run
command and that included you know
running a script on some data and
recorded which script was run
but um this
lacks a very crucial piece of digital
provenance of digital information on how
that file came to be and and that is the
software environment
um
and uh if you do not yet share software
environments then i hope i have a couple
of reasons for why you should maybe do
so as well as some um hints on how you
can do this
uh whenever you create a result whenever
you create a scientific finding some new
piece of knowledge then this will likely
be generated from some code on some data
but also on
your specific computer with a set of
tools you have installed
the more of those ingredients of a
research result you share when you
publish your science the more likely can
others build up or reproduce your
results and software is a
crucial component
in that
in that in that
recipe of creating
results because it has
an impact on the results that you
that you will get
and that
you know may be known to you if you ever
like one
command and you didn't have the right
software environment installed or you
had a different version and so forth
this is a cool article here that tried
to reproduce the very same
analysis with exactly the same tools
just on different computers in different
operating systems and
even if it's the same software and the
same versions that i used
just running it on a new operating
system has a lot of
influence on the results depending on
the kind of analysis that you run
so here is is just a minor difference
between two operating systems that just
had
one update in a c library that performs
these
bases or that performs the calculations
that lays the basis for any kind of math
that's done in your system
but it results in
slight changes in the results so
having a concrete idea on which software
was used is a prerequisite for
computational reproducibility
in scientific results
and apart from computational work for
disability it's actually nice to have
software environment simply because
software can be such a pain to install
it is probably true if you have
yesterday spent an hour trying to get a
python environment to to work or if
you've have used any of the latino
scientific software some of the larger
toolboxes uh any system that you haven't
yet installed it can be an absolute pain
to install so
um if you uh
make
your tools all of the software that is
needed to create a result that you
produced um available to others then you
can spare them a lot of pain and they
can also spare
you a lot of pain if they share their
software environment
and one of the ways to do it it will not
solve all of the problems it has its
downsides uh
definitely as well but one of the ways
in which software environments can be
shared is via what is called software
continuous those
containers encapsulate software
environment including all of the
software that is installed and they
isolated from the operating system that
the container runs on that gives you a
very um shareable
uh and secure
mean to you know package up all of your
software and then send it to someone
else who will be readily able to run all
of the software without having to
install it there are many solutions out
there and two common solutions that you
may know are docker and singularity
i'm not sure who is still there but if
you if you're still there um you can
give me a quick indication of um what
kind of
experience you have with software
containers whether you've never heard of
it
whether you have heard of it but haven't
used it
uh if you have created your own software
com environments
so one expert is already here
the link is here
okay so so it's it's um
we have a couple of experts but most
people
haven't used or haven't even heard of
software containers so in that case i'm
also glad that i could at least you know
name drop this concept because it can it
can be very very useful for a lot of
scientific applications
um so to quickly um explain what
software containers are maybe you have
heard of the concept of a virtual
machine
it is better than a virtual machine or
at least easier to use
because it is a portable and very
shareable bundle of any kind of software
library that you want and all of the
dependencies that are necessary to run
it it is able to run on a different
computer's system without
requiring the other person to install
the software so
you are in principle able to just create
a single file that includes
all of the software that is relevant for
your specific analysis send it to
someone else and they don't need to
install stuff they can
fire up that container and the container
is a secure
environment that is isolated from the
host operating system
uses some of its resources you know
cannot um
cannot pose a threat to the host
operating system and does not does not
make you know any kind of lasting
lasting changes by installing new stuff
everything is contained in that
container
you may use docker when you are a
windows user because docker is a
software solution that runs on all
operating soft
systems
at least if you have windows
professional it does not run on windows
home
there is the only way to to use um
containerized software on windows home
is via the windows subsystem for linux
but docker requires administrative
privileges when it is run and that makes
it an impossible choice for shared
compute environments such as
computational clusters unless you have a
system administrator who is
either especially reckless or especially
creative
a different
technology singularity singularity might
be unknown to windows users
because it's not available there
um but it is a software container
solution that does not require
administrative privileges so
um i'm seeing it in the chat
uh nice singularity work so if you run
containerized analysis on a cluster on a
server then use singularity
the good thing is that these two
solutions are kind of interoperable at
least singularity can for example use
and build docker images so um
you you have uh
you you can use both of them um if you
have someone who shares a singularity
recipe with you but you're in windows
then um in all likelihood you are still
able to use it
now um there is another data extension
so another standalone data led package
that equips the datalet core package
with additional commands and that
extension is called data led containers
and the commands or the functionality it
adds to datalet is the ability to also
include software containers in datasets
and not only include software containers
or software environments
into your dataset but also
uh run
or execute any kind of command inside of
them so uh you can you have seen the
data at containers1 command yesterday
that ran this this script you can
exchange it with the data led containers
run command
and then your script will be run inside
of the software container that you
provide or whatever script is included
in the software container will be run on
your data so that
extension adds additional provenance on
the software that has been used
to your data set and that works with
singularity
or docker images
um and now i
will briefly use the last 20 minutes um
[Music]
to
uh demonstrate how this uh
how this uh can be used by showing you
a very fast fashion how to do a
reproducible analysis with sub datasets
yoda principles
data light containers
just here on my computer
let me fire that up
i will try to be fast so the analysis
that i'm doing is a neural imaging
analysis i will start from dicom images
from an mri scanner i will convert them
them to a nifty
nifty format and bit structure them to
have you know readily usable
input data i will publish that and then
i will reuse those
pre-structured
nifty images for an analysis
so the first thing that i'm going to do
and you will remember that command is to
create a data set
where i will put my bits data in this is
going to become a super data set that
will hold my bits structured nifty
images
and
i'm going to create a you know read me
about this so that
anyone i'm sharing this with is
able to find out what this is about so
i'm
adding adding a readme file
to my data set and what i'm going to do
now is i'm going to link the input data
the dicom data that i'm going to use as
input
i'm not going to add them directly to
this data set but i'm going to add them
in the form of a registered sub data set
so i'm using the data clone command with
a github url where we have pushed some
some
example dicom data
um and i'm going to include this data
set in my bitstata data set and have it
registered in that precise version as
input data to use for the restructure
the next thing i'm going to do is i'm
going to add software containers to my
data set
and
here i'm doing this in a very uh handy
way simply by adding
a different sub data set to this data
set
this comes from github it is publicly
available and it is a very useful
container collection filled with
software containers of neural imaging
software such as fmri prep
and and many others that that might be
suitable for you
now i have installed the led containers
extension
and running the containers list command
recursively to operate across dataset
boundaries
i am able to see all of the available
software containers that i can now use i
have them at my disposal and i can
run
any kind of analysis inside of one of
those data sets with useful software and
none of this is software that i have to
install on this infrastructure here i
can also check
the sub data sets that i have installed
in this case it's two i've created a sub
data set for the input data i've created
a sub data set for the software and
those are standalone units that i can
flexibly reuse at a later point for
example
um i'm just going to run this because it
takes a minute to
to continue to finish
what i'm using in order to convert icoms
to nifty images i'm not sure if you
you're working with fmr i so just
disregard it in case this is not
relevant to you
but in order to convert it icon image to
a nifty image
i'm using a converter that is called
udiconf
and um qdconf is also capable of
directly restructuring
um
the
the files into a format such as bits and
then in addition to that also using a
really useful metadata convention that
um makes the structuring automatic so
that i actually don't have to do much i
can just
run
um
this call here
uh on the reprint convention it's it's
if you work with icoms it might it might
be meaningful for you if then please
just ignore it the important part is
that i have wrapped this inside of a
data like containers run command and i
have included a commit message to the
execution of that command and i have
provided a container name that points to
one of the containers here that are at
my disposal
i have also included a description on
which are the inputs and which are the
outputs
and what is happening so far is that um
datalat has retrieved the necessary
software so it has um downloaded via
data let get the software container from
its remote registered source
and
now it runs it's a little bit wordy and
runs what is called a night pipe
workflow that's the software that's
installed in that container and used
inside of utica to perform these
these conversions and luckily it's done
now
you can see all of the new files that
this has added
and i can run
a quick difference between
the current state
and the previous state
to see what
has been changed
and in this case here
it's
all of these it's all of these these
files that were added
i can also check the
git history for the
commit that was created when i ran this
command
and that
includes such a run record that you've
seen yesterday already
but
as an additional extra input this run
record also includes the
software specification in the form of
this
container image
uh what i then can do is i can go and
um
publish that thing to github at auto gym
i'm going to publish it um to jin so i'm
going to just
going to
quickly
create a new repository on jin under my
user account and then i'm going to
add this as a sibling as we have done
earlier today
[Music]
i'm going to register it by hand this
time because the computer that i'm
executing this one doesn't have the most
recent version of data led yet
i can see that jyn is now a registered
sibling of my data set just in the same
way that that you have seen
um
in your own
endeavors and then i can you know push
my
bit structured and
converted uh date to a place where
others can maybe use it
that takes a little while
but in the end
you know it's here i have my subject
and
i have published it
now the next thing i'm doing is i'm
creating a reproducible analysis and
here i'm using the create command with a
different configuration than text to get
this is a configuration that
adheres to the yoda principles or aids
adherence to the euro principles so it
is called yoda
and
creating a data set with a yoda
procedure with a yoda configuration
does two things for one it applies a
configuration that ensures that anything
that is code is only
kept in git and not annexed and it
creates a couple of
human readable
description files like readme files that
you know urge you or not you to properly
document everything that
that you have done and explain
explain uh the dataset contents they
also have little you know placeholder
descriptions that you can use to
create a nice readme
what i can then do is because this is a
new data
analysis super data set
i can take my input data that could
either be the local bits data set that i
have already created but i can also you
know
pretend
i'm a new collaborator
on this on this data set so i'm cloning
it
from jin
and included as an input sub data set
into my analysis and then i have
prepared a script that performs a simple
analysis on this input data
it will just extract a brain mask from
the
nifty image and i have put that on
github and i'm using data download url
to save it from github and um
to download it from beta and save it in
the dataset
the next thing i'm going to do because
that
script requires a little bit of python
and mirror imaging software is i'm going
to register a software container
and i know that some people if you have
already you know created their own
software containers
um so if you've created your own
software containers you can just
containers add those containers from a
remote source or from a local path
um into
your data set under a specific name if
you do not want to create your own
containers then you can just use for
example the container collection that
provides you with a lot of
containers
readily readily usable
and by the way those are containers that
docker and singularity can just sort
it's fine on windows it is fine on the
compute cluster it is fine on your mac
it is fine on your linux pc
and now i can again run a data led
container as one command
in this case uh i'm not calling a
specific container with
which which includes a routine that runs
but
i
execute the script that i have just
downloaded similarly to how i yesterday
ran the execution of the script
um
but
by
specifying a container to run this in
i'm able to
to to run this python script here inside
of the software environment that the
container provides so that i don't
actually have to install anything and if
i share this um
this this data set with you
there is there is no python software you
need to install no
package you need to you need to
retrieve in advance you can simply
rerun the commit that is being created
right now
to recompute everything that was done by
me so
um in having also containers included in
my data set having this kind of modular
structure i'm making it
very easy for others to figure out what
has been done and what's necessary to
redo it and to automatically redo it so
here again there's a run commit and i
can say that rebound to
perform the exact same computation and
the required software environment
okay um
really quick summary you already know
about data later on now you also know
about data that containers run
which is useful to capture and share
additional software environments as
provenance
you can use it with docker and
singularity containers um and if you
create
your analysis hierarchies if you plan to
use light for producible analysis in a
modular way then you make it a little
bit easier for yourself to access manage
and
keep reusability in place
the data.clone command is the command
that you will want to use to create
those linked data sets
in case you ever forget this little dash
de-data set
option it's not a problem if you clone a
data set into an existing data set
and then run data let's save then it
will recognize this other directory as a
data set and actually link it as a sub
data set
but that's also something to be mindful
of if you ever clone a data set into an
existing data set by accident and then
save it then it will be as updated it's
not a problem but you just you know
register the little dataset dependency
on top in in into the dataset
and then there's
um the yoda procedure that you can for
example use together with datalit create
to um
apply a little different configurations
to your dataset
apply a little bit of structure code
directory
um
and so forth to to you're on your data
set
i'm going to skip this
but something that i wanted to
nevertheless um show you because you
may
maybe are interested in containers there
are a couple of cool
um resources i can recommend if you want
to get started with containers if you
find yourself in the future situation
where you are tasked with creating a
container
there are some tools that
will automatically create software
containers for you so there's repo to
docker
which you can point to a published data
set that's on let's say github
and
repo to docker will be automatically
creating all of the right configurations
for you to create a software container
there is the software called neurodocker
which is a command line tool that you
can use with a number of very sensible
options to
create
software containers of very popular
neuroscientific
software tools
then there's the
container collection that i've that i've
used in this quick example here that is
free
for everyone and includes quite a bit of
stuff that you may want and if you're an
r user then there's a specific
distribution
uh rocker that makes it easy to make
docker containers with your required r
software
and with that
i
think
i will conclude this workshop
i want to thank you
a lot for sticking with me until the end
we all made it